3, 2 1. Yes. Hello, Boyan.
Hi there. Welcome. Thank you. Thanks for doing this. I really appreciate it.
And I love what you're doing. I've seen your Ted talk.
I've seen many in numerous conferences that you've appeared at and discussions
you've given on this and for people to jump into this right now,
what you've done is think long and hard and devise a method
to try to clean up some of the plastic that we have floating around in the
ocean famously the Pacific garbage patch is it's enormous patch of garbage
that's between California and Hawaii.
How did you get involved in this and what, what, what, you're a young guy.
How old are you? Uh, 23 already. 23 already. You sound like, oh my God.
I'm sweating. How old were you when you started?
Um, I think I started thinking about this when I was 16 and, uh,
founded this organization when I was 18. That's.
Crazy. All you lazy out there that are 16 years old,
that aren't doing with your life. Just think about this kid. That's amazing.
I'm so happy that people like you in the world. No, thank you. Yeah.
So you started thinking about it when you were 16 and you know,
this is something that is extremely disturbing to anybody that's paid attention,
especially when you see the birds that have died with all these plastic bottle
caps inside their bodies. And, you know,
you see their carcasses with these multicolored caps in them and they thought
these things were food. It was just one of the many, many,
many problems that occur when you have plastic floating around and
just enormous numbers in the ocean. Sure.
Yeah. I mean, there's really three problems with this plastic. First of all,
obviously the ecosystem damage,
I think there are roundabout 800 species that actually could go extinct because
of this plastic pollution. Um, then there's the economic threat, uh,
in terms of, um, you know, uh,
damage to fisheries damage to tourism and things like that.
I think it's around $13 billion a year,
according to the UN and then thirdly,
there's the health impact or the potential health impact because these tiny
plastic pieces, they are actually also end up in the fish we eat, uh,
that take chemicals with it. And, uh, yeah,
that ends up on our dinner plate as well.
So what was it that prompted you to,
to dedicate essentially dedicate your young life to this?
Sure. Yeah. So, uh, I've always been very passionate about technology and just,
uh, building things,
I think sort of having an idea in your mind and then seeing that become reality
and be able to touch it and things like that. I think, uh,
there's literally no better feeling in the world than that.
So I've been building my own things since it was two years old, I think, um,
first starting with things like tree houses and zip lines,
but then going into sort of computers and explosives and rockets and things like
that, which was a lot of fun, but it wasn't very, uh, useful, I would say. Um,
so it's kind of looking for something sort of, uh, something that real to, to,
to work on a real problem. Um,
and that's what I then came across when I was 16 years old,
it was scuba diving in Greece and I came across small plastic bags of fish and I
wondered, why can we just clean this up? And, uh,
that question sort of kept circling around in my head and, um,
yeah, sort of thought about how could we do this? The ocean is pretty big. Uh,
and then eventually came up with this idea do to use these natural ocean
currents, uh, to basically let us collect the plastic.
And so how do you have many different
prototypes that you started with and you eventually wound up with what you have
now and have you started implementing them yet?
Yeah, I mean, so the, um, the,
the concept that was presented back in 2012 with my,
my first TEDx stoke, um, and if you compare that to where we are right now,
it's sort of day and night of, of a difference. Um, so, um, yeah,
through testing and through, uh, all these prototypings, um, yeah,
obviously there has been a lot of development there,
but the key idea has stayed the same that instead of going after the plastic
with boats and nets,
which will take roundabout 79,000 years to clean up just as great Pacific
garbage patch, instead of doing that, we let the plastic come to us. So use, uh,
basically a network, a fleet of very long floating barriers,
which are oriented in a U shape and they float around and they kind of act like
a massive Pac-Man. So, um, it's like a,
like a funnel brings the plastic towards it. Uh,
the natural ocean currents push it against it moves towards the center,
becomes very concentrated and once it's concentrated, well,
then it's easy to get it out and ship it to land for recycling.
And it has this started yet. Um, so the past, uh, so we were founded, um, yeah,
four years ago. Um, in that time, on one side we did the reconnaissance.
So we,
we mapped the patch with 30 boats and an airplane at the same time to really
understand how much is out there,
which turns out to be 1.8 trillion pieces of floating in this great Pacific
garbage patch. Uh, and on the other hand, we've done all the testing.
So we've done hundreds of scale model tests.
We've done prototypes back in Europe, uh, on the north sea. Uh,
and actually right now we're, we're manufacturing the,
the first real cleanup system, which, uh, is scheduled to be launched, uh,
from San Francisco, uh,
to the great Pacific garbage patch in around two or three months, 10.
So has anything been used, like,
is there a proof of concept of have you've done like real large scale
testing where you've shown that you can actually do this?
Well, I mean, we've done a lot of subsystem testing. So the,
the prototypes in the north sea for example,
were sort of these 12 meter sections. And we, we managed to,
to keep that in one piece. So, um,
but then also the plastic capturing that worked very well in the lab. Um,
but yeah, the real,
the real proof of course has to come from this one real system in the great
Pacific garbage patch, collecting plastic.
And that's what we really hope to achieve.
This year. So this is the big, right.
The great Pacific garbage patch is the largest. Yes.
Because between California and Hawaii, Hawaii.
Yeah. So there are five areas in the world where plastic, uh, concentrates, uh,
this is by far the largest one there for others. Uh, but they are, uh,
they combined only, uh, contain less plastic than this one in the,
in the north Pacific.
Do we know why that is? Uh, probably.
Because of Asia. Uh, so Asia has a, quite a big problem in terms of that.
They, they use a lot of plastic, but they don't have a good infrastructure.
So by far the largest source of plastic flowing into the ocean is also this,
uh, there's one continent and what's being released there naturally by,
because of the current ends up in this north Pacific.
The patch is such a strange problem because it wasn't something that was
discussed in the eighties, the nineties, it was nothing.
And then all of a sudden, somewhere in the year, 2000,
I remember hearing about the massive amount of plastic we have in the ocean.
And it just, it just made sense. I was like, oh, well, of course,
of course it's going to wind up there, but the sheer size of it is staggering.
Yeah. And I think that, to me, the worrying thing is that it's a,
it's a persistent problem. So with many other kinds of pollutions,
when you sort of turn off the tap it's will be solved by itself. Think about,
for example, the ozone hall with the CFCs. Uh, but with this,
like if you turn off the tap,
but the problem is still there and in a hundred years, it will still be there.
Um, so I think to really solve it, you need to do two things. One side,
we have to close the tap. On the other hand, we also need to clean it up.
Jamie just pulled up a, uh,
a size comparison where it shows 1.6 million
square kilometers in area twice the size of Texas or three times the size of
France.
Yeah. So this was a study. We published a few, a few weeks ago.
So this was the result of the recognizance effort. Um,
and it's kind of funny,
like every other news outlet used a different size comparison.
So I think it was CNN that says it was the size of Mongolia. Um, um,
we always use tennis.
Yeah. Texas is America. We use Texas for everything.
Tons of California as well. Um, so yeah, it's pretty.
It's insane. And it's getting bigger. I'm sure.
Yeah. So the, I mean the, the area doesn't really change. It's more the,
the concentration and concentration.
When did we realize that this was an issue like collectively scientists?
Yeah. Um,
so there hasn't been that have been sort of small sampling efforts since the
seventies. So back then,
it was the first time plastic was described as being something that floats in
the ocean. Uh, but it really only entered the public consciousness.
I think in the late nineties, there was this, uh, this captain, Charles Moore,
uh, who, um,
were sort of sailing through it and he saw this plastic and he was like, well,
um, we need to describe this. And then he did a scientific paper on it. And, um,
yeah. And actually, I think he was the one that termed the,
the term great Pacific garbage patch.
He was riding his boat through it for a long period of time, I guess. Yeah.
I think it was, um, it was participating in some sailing race and, um,
he went through it and then yeah, he just saw all that stuff.
So he was the, sort of the Canary in the coal mine, I guess. Yeah. Yeah.
So what,
what is it one of those things where it's hard to get different
governments to act on this because you know,
like who's responsible for the ocean.
Yeah. I think it's a, it's sort of this tragic tragedy of the commons, right.
Where it's international water sort of everyone's problem, but at the same time,
legally it's no one's problem. Um, so, um, yeah,
and besides that, uh, what,
what I really felt when I started the ocean cleanup was that think everyone
wanted this problem to be solved, but at the same time,
we didn't really have a way to do it.
There was somebody wasn't any technology to do that. And, um,
that's why I thought, well,
perhaps this is an opportunity to combine my interests of a solving this
problem, but B also developing technology, which is that.